several hundred people have died in
Congo's recent Ebola outbreaks but chimp
mortality may have been in the thousands
chimpanzees always lived with this
threat but now they live in fragmented
groups and that makes it harder for
numbers to bounce back the problems of
disease are particularly acute at Gombe
there's a lot of conservation science
that shows that small numbers are bad
you get very small numbers eventually
you'll get inbreeding if a big disease
epidemic strikes it can wipe out the
population very quickly throughout
Africa many chimps have become isolated
in national parks now that all these
parks are on the international tourist
trail chimps are exposed to new diseases
as well
finally after a five hour uphill
struggle these gombe visitors are within
sight of a wild chimpanzee yeah you can
just get some of this slim
made it worth it you forget the pain
it's a precious moment but unknowingly
tourists with the slightest cough or
sniffle could be taking away treasured
pictures and leaving behind a microbial
death sentence gombe is welcomed
tourists for over 25 years so it's
already learned some painful lessons for
visitors for tourists people who've just
come from abroad we ask them to stay 10
meters so about 33 feet away from
chimpanzees now that means it's harder
to get a good picture it's harder to
make movies about them because we keep
further away but we think it's really
important to do that all the guides in
gombe are now trained to understand why
the rooms are their guides want tourists
to have a good time but having survived
the most grueling hike of their lives
the visitors are tempted to stay with
the chimps for longer and closer than is
wise